Concurrency model and the event loop
JavaScript has a concurrency model based on an event loop, which is responsible for executing the code, collecting and processing events, and executing queued sub-tasks. This model is quite different from models in other languages like C and Java.

Runtime concepts
The following sections explain a theoretical model. Modern JavaScript engines implement and heavily optimize the described semantics.

Visual representation
Stack, heap, queue
Stack
Function calls form a stack of frames.

function foo(b) {
  let a = 10
  return a + b + 11
}

function bar(x) {
  let y = 3
  return foo(x * y)
}

console.log(bar(7)) //returns 42
Copy to Clipboard
Order of operations:

When calling bar, a first frame is created containing references to bar's arguments and local variables.
When bar calls foo, a second frame is created and pushed on top of the first one, containing references to foo's arguments and local variables.
When foo returns, the top frame element is popped out of the stack (leaving only bar's call frame).
When bar returns, the stack is empty.
Note that the arguments and local variables may continue to exist, as they are stored outside the stack — so they can be accessed by any nested functions long after their outer function has returned.

Heap
Objects are allocated in a heap which is just a name to denote a large (mostly unstructured) region of memory.

Queue
A JavaScript runtime uses a message queue, which is a list of messages to be processed. Each message has an associated function which gets called in order to handle the message.

At some point during the event loop, the runtime starts handling the messages on the queue, starting with the oldest one. To do so, the message is removed from the queue and its corresponding function is called with the message as an input parameter. As always, calling a function creates a new stack frame for that function's use.

The processing of functions continues until the stack is once again empty. Then, the event loop will process the next message in the queue (if there is one).

Event loop
The event loop got its name because of how it's usually implemented, which usually resembles:

while (queue.waitForMessage()) {
  queue.processNextMessage()
}